## Getting Started

### Dependencies

In order to develop a Tree-sitter parser, there are two dependencies that you need to install:

- **Node.js** - Tree-sitter grammars are written in JavaScript, and Tree-sitter uses [Node.js][node.js] to interpret JavaScript files. It requires the `node` command to be in one of the directories in your [`PATH`][path-env]. You'll need Node.js version 6.0 or greater.
- **A C Compiler** - Tree-sitter creates parsers that are written in C. In order to run and test these parsers with the `tree-sitter parse` or `tree-sitter test` commands, you must have a C/C++ compiler installed. Tree-sitter will try to look for these compilers in the standard places for each platform.

### Installation

To create a Tree-sitter parser, you need to use [the `tree-sitter` CLI][tree-sitter-cli]. You can install the CLI in a few different ways:

- Build the `tree-sitter-cli` [Rust crate][crate] from source using [`cargo`][cargo], the Rust package manager. This works on any platform. See [the contributing docs](./contributing#developing-tree-sitter) for more information.
- Install the `tree-sitter-cli` [Node.js module][node-module] using [`npm`][npm], the Node package manager. This approach is fast, but is only works on certain platforms, because it relies on pre-built binaries.
- Download a binary for your platform from [the latest GitHub release][releases], and put it into a directory on your `PATH`.

### Project Setup

The preferred convention is to name the parser repository "tree-sitter-" followed by the name of the language.

```sh
mkdir tree-sitter-${YOUR_LANGUAGE_NAME}
cd tree-sitter-${YOUR_LANGUAGE_NAME}
```

You can use the `npm` command line tool to create a `package.json` file that describes your project, and allows your parser to be used from Node.js.

```sh
# This will prompt you for input
npm init

# This installs a small module that lets your parser be used from Node
npm install --save nan

# This installs the Tree-sitter CLI itself
npm install --save-dev tree-sitter-cli
```

The last command will install the CLI into the `node_modules` folder in your working directory. An executable program called `tree-sitter` will be created inside of `node_modules/.bin/`. You may want to follow the Node.js convention of adding that folder to your `PATH` so that you can easily run this program when working in this directory.

```sh
# In your shell profile script
export PATH=$PATH:./node_modules/.bin
```

Once you have the CLI installed, create a file called `grammar.js` with the following contents:

```js
module.exports = grammar({
  name: "YOUR_LANGUAGE_NAME",

  rules: {
    // TODO: add the actual grammar rules
    source_file: ($) => "hello",
  },
});
```

Then run the following command:

```sh
tree-sitter generate
```

This will generate the C code required to parse this trivial language, as well as a few files that are needed to compile and load this native parser as a Node.js module.

You can test this parser by creating a source file with the contents "hello" and parsing it:

```sh
echo 'hello' > example-file
tree-sitter parse example-file
```

Alternatively, in Windows PowerShell:

```pwsh
"hello" | Out-File example-file -Encoding utf8
tree-sitter parse example-file
```

This should print the following:

```text
(source_file [0, 0] - [1, 0])
```

You now have a working parser.
