## Tool Overview

Let's go over all of the functionality of the `tree-sitter` command line tool.

### Command: `generate`

The most important command you'll use is `tree-sitter generate`. This command reads the `grammar.js` file in your current working directory and creates a file called `src/parser.c`, which implements the parser. After making changes to your grammar, just run `tree-sitter generate` again.

The first time you run `tree-sitter generate`, it will also generate a few other files for bindings for the following languages:

#### C/C++

- `Makefile` - This file tells `make` how to compile your language.
- `bindings/c/tree-sitter-language.h` - This file provides the C interface of your language.
- `bindings/c/tree-sitter-language.pc` - This file provides pkg-config metadata about your language's C library.
- `src/tree_sitter/parser.h` - This file provides some basic C definitions that are used in your generated `parser.c` file.
- `src/tree_sitter/alloc.h` - This file provides some memory allocation macros that are to be used in your external scanner, if you have one.
- `src/tree_sitter/array.h` - This file provides some array macros that are to be used in your external scanner, if you have one.

#### Go

- `bindings/go/binding.go` - This file wraps your language in a Go module.
- `bindings/go/binding_test.go` - This file contains a test for the Go package.

#### Node

- `binding.gyp` - This file tells Node.js how to compile your language.
- `bindings/node/index.js` - This is the file that Node.js initially loads when using your language.
- `bindings/node/binding.cc` - This file wraps your language in a JavaScript module for Node.js.

#### Python

- `pyproject.toml` - This file is the manifest of the Python package.
- `setup.py` - This file tells Python how to compile your language.
- `bindings/python/binding.c` - This file wraps your language in a Python module.
- `bindings/python/tree_sitter_language/__init__.py` - This file tells Python how to load your language.
- `bindings/python/tree_sitter_language/__init__.pyi` - This file provides type hints for your parser when used in Python.
- `bindings/python/tree_sitter_language/py.typed` - This file provides type hints for your parser when used in Python.

#### Rust

- `Cargo.toml` - This file is the manifest of the Rust package.
- `bindings/rust/lib.rs` - This file wraps your language in a Rust crate when used in Rust.
- `bindings/rust/build.rs` - This file wraps the building process for the Rust crate.

#### Swift

- `Package.swift` - This file tells Swift how to compile your language.
- `bindings/swift/TreeSitterLanguage/language.h` - This file wraps your language in a Swift module when used in Swift.

If there is an ambiguity or _local ambiguity_ in your grammar, Tree-sitter will detect it during parser generation, and it will exit with a `Unresolved conflict` error message. See below for more information on these errors.

### Command: `build`

The `build` command compiles your parser into a dynamically-loadable library, either as a shared object (`.so`, `.dylib`, or `.dll`) or as a WASM module.

You can specify whether to compile it as a wasm module with the `--wasm`/`-w` flag, and you can opt in to use docker or podman to supply emscripten with the `--docker`/`-d` flag. This removes the need to install emscripten on your machine locally.

You can specify where to output the shared object file (native or WASM) with the `--output`/`-o` flag, which accepts either an absolute path or relative path. Note that if you don't supply this flag, the CLI will attempt to figure out what the language name is based on the parent directory (so building in `tree-sitter-javascript` will resolve to `javascript`) to use for the output file. If it can't figure it out, it will default to `parser`, thus generating `parser.so` or `parser.wasm` in the current working directory.

Lastly, you can also specify a path to the actual grammar directory, in case you are not currently in one. This is done by providing a path as the first _positional_ argument.

Example:

```sh
tree-sitter build --wasm --output ./build/parser.wasm tree-sitter-javascript
```

Notice how the `tree-sitter-javascript` argument is the first positional argument.

### Command: `test`

The `tree-sitter test` command allows you to easily test that your parser is working correctly.

For each rule that you add to the grammar, you should first create a _test_ that describes how the syntax trees should look when parsing that rule. These tests are written using specially-formatted text files in the `test/corpus/` directory within your parser's root folder.

For example, you might have a file called `test/corpus/statements.txt` that contains a series of entries like this:

```text
==================
Return statements
==================

func x() int {
  return 1;
}

---

(source_file
  (function_definition
    (identifier)
    (parameter_list)
    (primitive_type)
    (block
      (return_statement (number)))))
```

- The **name** of each test is written between two lines containing only `=` (equal sign) characters.
- Then the **input source code** is written, followed by a line containing three or more `-` (dash) characters.
- Then, the **expected output syntax tree** is written as an [S-expression][s-exp]. The exact placement of whitespace in the S-expression doesn't matter, but ideally the syntax tree should be legible. Note that the S-expression does not show syntax nodes like `func`, `(` and `;`, which are expressed as strings and regexes in the grammar. It only shows the _named_ nodes, as described in [this section][named-vs-anonymous-nodes-section] of the page on parser usage.

  The expected output section can also _optionally_ show the [_field names_][field-names-section] associated with each child node. To include field names in your tests, you write a node's field name followed by a colon, before the node itself in the S-expression:

```text
(source_file
  (function_definition
    name: (identifier)
    parameters: (parameter_list)
    result: (primitive_type)
    body: (block
      (return_statement (number)))))
```

- If your language's syntax conflicts with the `===` and `---` test separators, you can optionally add an arbitrary identical suffix (in the below example, `|||`) to disambiguate them:

```text
==================|||
Basic module
==================|||

---- MODULE Test ----
increment(n) == n + 1
====

---|||

(source_file
  (module (identifier)
    (operator (identifier)
      (parameter_list (identifier))
      (plus (identifier_ref) (number)))))
```

These tests are important. They serve as the parser's API documentation, and they can be run every time you change the grammar to verify that everything still parses correctly.

By default, the `tree-sitter test` command runs all of the tests in your `test/corpus/` folder. To run a particular test, you can use the `-f` flag:

```sh
tree-sitter test -f 'Return statements'
```

The recommendation is to be comprehensive in adding tests. If it's a visible node, add it to a test file in your `test/corpus` directory. It's typically a good idea to test all of the permutations of each language construct. This increases test coverage, but doubly acquaints readers with a way to examine expected outputs and understand the "edges" of a language.

#### Attributes

Tests can be annotated with a few `attributes`. Attributes must be put in the header, below the test name, and start with a `:`.
A couple of attributes also take in a parameter, which require the use of parenthesis.

**Note**: If you'd like to supply in multiple parameters, e.g. to run tests on multiple platforms or to test multiple languages, you can repeat the attribute on a new line.

The following attributes are available:

- `:skip` — This attribute will skip the test when running `tree-sitter test`.
  This is useful when you want to temporarily disable running a test without deleting it.
- `:error` — This attribute will assert that the parse tree contains an error. It's useful to just validate that a certain input is invalid without displaying the whole parse tree, as such you should omit the parse tree below the `---` line.
- `:fail-fast` — This attribute will stop the testing additional tests if the test marked with this attribute fails.
- `:language(LANG)` — This attribute will run the tests using the parser for the specified language. This is useful for multi-parser repos, such as XML and DTD, or Typescript and TSX. The default parser will be the first entry in the `tree-sitter` field in the root `package.json`, so having a way to pick a second or even third parser is useful.
- `:platform(PLATFORM)` — This attribute specifies the platform on which the test should run. It is useful to test platform-specific behavior (e.g. Windows newlines are different from Unix). This attribute must match up with Rust's [`std::env::consts::OS`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/env/consts/constant.OS.html).

Examples using attributes:

```text
=========================
Test that will be skipped
:skip
=========================

int main() {}

-------------------------

====================================
Test that will run on Linux or macOS

:platform(linux)
:platform(macos)
====================================

int main() {}

------------------------------------

========================================================================
Test that expects an error, and will fail fast if there's no parse error
:fail-fast
:error
========================================================================

int main ( {}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

=================================================
Test that will parse with both Typescript and TSX
:language(typescript)
:language(tsx)
=================================================

console.log('Hello, world!');

-------------------------------------------------
```

#### Automatic Compilation

You might notice that the first time you run `tree-sitter test` after regenerating your parser, it takes some extra time. This is because Tree-sitter automatically compiles your C code into a dynamically-loadable library. It recompiles your parser as-needed whenever you update it by re-running `tree-sitter generate`.

#### Syntax Highlighting Tests

The `tree-sitter test` command will _also_ run any syntax highlighting tests in the `test/highlight` folder, if it exists. For more information about syntax highlighting tests, see [the syntax highlighting page][syntax-highlighting-tests].

### Command: `parse`

You can run your parser on an arbitrary file using `tree-sitter parse`. This will print the resulting the syntax tree, including nodes' ranges and field names, like this:

```text
(source_file [0, 0] - [3, 0]
  (function_declaration [0, 0] - [2, 1]
    name: (identifier [0, 5] - [0, 9])
    parameters: (parameter_list [0, 9] - [0, 11])
    result: (type_identifier [0, 12] - [0, 15])
    body: (block [0, 16] - [2, 1]
      (return_statement [1, 2] - [1, 10]
        (expression_list [1, 9] - [1, 10]
          (int_literal [1, 9] - [1, 10]))))))
```

You can pass any number of file paths and glob patterns to `tree-sitter parse`, and it will parse all of the given files. The command will exit with a non-zero status code if any parse errors occurred. You can also prevent the syntax trees from being printed using the `--quiet` flag. Additionally, the `--stat` flag prints out aggregated parse success/failure information for all processed files. This makes `tree-sitter parse` usable as a secondary testing strategy: you can check that a large number of files parse without error:

```sh
tree-sitter parse 'examples/**/*.go' --quiet --stat
```

### Command: `highlight`

You can run syntax highlighting on an arbitrary file using `tree-sitter highlight`. This can either output colors directly to your terminal using ansi escape codes, or produce HTML (if the `--html` flag is passed). For more information, see [the syntax highlighting page][syntax-highlighting].

### The Grammar DSL

The following is a complete list of built-in functions you can use in your `grammar.js` to define rules. Use-cases for some of these functions will be explained in more detail in later sections.

- **Symbols (the `$` object)** - Every grammar rule is written as a JavaScript function that takes a parameter conventionally called `$`. The syntax `$.identifier` is how you refer to another grammar symbol within a rule. Names starting with `$.MISSING` or `$.UNEXPECTED` should be avoided as they have special meaning for the `tree-sitter test` command.
- **String and Regex literals** - The terminal symbols in a grammar are described using JavaScript strings and regular expressions. Of course during parsing, Tree-sitter does not actually use JavaScript's regex engine to evaluate these regexes; it generates its own regex-matching logic as part of each parser. Regex literals are just used as a convenient way of writing regular expressions in your grammar.
- **Regex Limitations** - Currently, only a subset of the Regex engine is actually
  supported. This is due to certain features like lookahead and lookaround assertions
  not feasible to use in an LR(1) grammar, as well as certain flags being unnecessary
  for tree-sitter. However, plenty of features are supported by default:

  - Character classes
  - Character ranges
  - Character sets
  - Quantifiers
  - Alternation
  - Grouping
  - Unicode character escapes
  - Unicode property escapes

- **Sequences : `seq(rule1, rule2, ...)`** - This function creates a rule that matches any number of other rules, one after another. It is analogous to simply writing multiple symbols next to each other in [EBNF notation][ebnf].
- **Alternatives : `choice(rule1, rule2, ...)`** - This function creates a rule that matches _one_ of a set of possible rules. The order of the arguments does not matter. This is analogous to the `|` (pipe) operator in EBNF notation.
- **Repetitions : `repeat(rule)`** - This function creates a rule that matches _zero-or-more_ occurrences of a given rule. It is analogous to the `{x}` (curly brace) syntax in EBNF notation.
- **Repetitions : `repeat1(rule)`** - This function creates a rule that matches _one-or-more_ occurrences of a given rule. The previous `repeat` rule is implemented in terms of `repeat1` but is included because it is very commonly used.
- **Options : `optional(rule)`** - This function creates a rule that matches _zero or one_ occurrence of a given rule. It is analogous to the `[x]` (square bracket) syntax in EBNF notation.
- **Precedence : `prec(number, rule)`** - This function marks the given rule with a numerical precedence which will be used to resolve [_LR(1) Conflicts_][lr-conflict] at parser-generation time. When two rules overlap in a way that represents either a true ambiguity or a _local_ ambiguity given one token of lookahead, Tree-sitter will try to resolve the conflict by matching the rule with the higher precedence. The default precedence of all rules is zero. This works similarly to the [precedence directives][yacc-prec] in Yacc grammars.
- **Left Associativity : `prec.left([number], rule)`** - This function marks the given rule as left-associative (and optionally applies a numerical precedence). When an LR(1) conflict arises in which all of the rules have the same numerical precedence, Tree-sitter will consult the rules' associativity. If there is a left-associative rule, Tree-sitter will prefer matching a rule that ends _earlier_. This works similarly to [associativity directives][yacc-prec] in Yacc grammars.
- **Right Associativity : `prec.right([number], rule)`** - This function is like `prec.left`, but it instructs Tree-sitter to prefer matching a rule that ends _later_.
- **Dynamic Precedence : `prec.dynamic(number, rule)`** - This function is similar to `prec`, but the given numerical precedence is applied at _runtime_ instead of at parser generation time. This is only necessary when handling a conflict dynamically using the `conflicts` field in the grammar, and when there is a genuine _ambiguity_: multiple rules correctly match a given piece of code. In that event, Tree-sitter compares the total dynamic precedence associated with each rule, and selects the one with the highest total. This is similar to [dynamic precedence directives][bison-dprec] in Bison grammars.
- **Tokens : `token(rule)`** - This function marks the given rule as producing only
  a single token. Tree-sitter's default is to treat each String or RegExp literal
  in the grammar as a separate token. Each token is matched separately by the lexer
  and returned as its own leaf node in the tree. The `token` function allows you to
  express a complex rule using the functions described above (rather than as a single
  regular expression) but still have Tree-sitter treat it as a single token.
  The token function will only accept terminal rules, so `token($.foo)` will not work.
  You can think of it as a shortcut for squashing complex rules of strings or regexes
  down to a single token.
- **Immediate Tokens : `token.immediate(rule)`** - Usually, whitespace (and any other extras, such as comments) is optional before each token. This function means that the token will only match if there is no whitespace.
- **Aliases : `alias(rule, name)`** - This function causes the given rule to _appear_ with an alternative name in the syntax tree. If `name` is a _symbol_, as in `alias($.foo, $.bar)`, then the aliased rule will _appear_ as a [named node][named-vs-anonymous-nodes-section] called `bar`. And if `name` is a _string literal_, as in `alias($.foo, 'bar')`, then the aliased rule will appear as an [anonymous node][named-vs-anonymous-nodes-section], as if the rule had been written as the simple string.
- **Field Names : `field(name, rule)`** - This function assigns a _field name_ to the child node(s) matched by the given rule. In the resulting syntax tree, you can then use that field name to access specific children.

In addition to the `name` and `rules` fields, grammars have a few other optional public fields that influence the behavior of the parser.

- **`extras`** - an array of tokens that may appear _anywhere_ in the language. This is often used for whitespace and comments. The default value of `extras` is to accept whitespace. To control whitespace explicitly, specify `extras: $ => []` in your grammar.
- **`inline`** - an array of rule names that should be automatically _removed_ from the grammar by replacing all of their usages with a copy of their definition. This is useful for rules that are used in multiple places but for which you _don't_ want to create syntax tree nodes at runtime.
- **`conflicts`** - an array of arrays of rule names. Each inner array represents a set of rules that's involved in an _LR(1) conflict_ that is _intended to exist_ in the grammar. When these conflicts occur at runtime, Tree-sitter will use the GLR algorithm to explore all of the possible interpretations. If _multiple_ parses end up succeeding, Tree-sitter will pick the subtree whose corresponding rule has the highest total _dynamic precedence_.
- **`externals`** - an array of token names which can be returned by an [_external scanner_](#external-scanners). External scanners allow you to write custom C code which runs during the lexing process in order to handle lexical rules (e.g. Python's indentation tokens) that cannot be described by regular expressions.
- **`precedences`** - an array of array of strings, where each array of strings defines named precedence levels in descending order. These names can be used in the `prec` functions to define precedence relative only to other names in the array, rather than globally. Can only be used with parse precedence, not lexical precedence.
- **`word`** - the name of a token that will match keywords for the purpose of the [keyword extraction](#keyword-extraction) optimization.
- **`supertypes`** an array of hidden rule names which should be considered to be 'supertypes' in the generated [_node types_ file][static-node-types].
